So let's start with the very first important step,
even though we're able to execute it here simply while typing code on the left and seeing it in the
console on the right,
technically you would need to implement your code in your HTML document to have anything to
run.
So if I open up my HTML document here, you'll see this is a normal HTML5 skeleton and
I won't go into HTML basics in this course.
I will create a new header here and you can quickly do this by simply typing h1 and then hitting
tab where it just say the Javascript bootcamp. Now this will appear in the output here but we won't
need the output for now,
so I'll close it.
Let's see how can we execute code in such HTML document.
Well if I go below the title here, I can type script and hit tab and this will create script tags for
me. If I type console log
Hello there and close this with brackets or with parentheses here
and then I click run, you see Hello there in the console
even though I didn't write anything here in the middle, right?
Well the reason for this is this middle column here is just a service or a convenience offered by this
website where I can execute Javascript right away
and indeed we will have to use this throughout the course but in reality,
you will have to include your scripts like this with such a script tag in your HTML document
.
Now when the browser renders your page, it basically runs through your
HTML code from top to bottom
and when it hits this script code,
it will immediately execute all the code it finds between the opening and the closing tag here.
This is why hello there gets printed to the console because that's all the code I have here
and as I said, it's immediately executed.
Now the script tag also has some attributes you can specify,
for example, the type attribute. I can set this type here to text/javascript and if I click run,
what will happen? I still see Hello there because this is an optional attribute
I can pass to specify that this is indeed Javascript code but I may also leave it out
and indeed, you would leave it out typically.
So there is no difference between both ways of executing this code.
Notice that currently, I'm executing this code or I have the script tag right here in the head section
.
Now imagine I take this code here,
remove it from the head section and put it right before my closing body tag here,
so at the end of the body section. What do you think will happen now?
Well if I click run, we still see Hello there
because as I said, the browser runs over your file from top to bottom and will execute any Javascript
code it finds,
therefore the position of the code doesn't really matter, it doesn't have to be inside the head section
to be executed.
Indeed it's best practice to put it right here where it currently is, right before the closing body tag.
Why is this the best practice?
Well as I said, the browser goes from top to bottom through your file and builds up your webpage,
now imagine you have a Javascript code here which triggers some long running operation.
In this case, the browser would be occupied and couldn't continue loading your webpage
below this script tag here.
Now that would of course mean that you might not see your webpage, even though technically it could be loaded,
even with your script not being finished.
Therefore by putting your scripts at the end of the page, you make sure that the HTML document
actually gets loaded before the script is executed, which of course first results in a performance increase
and
second, it makes sure that if your script is trying to access some HTML elements in your page, those
elements are actually there because the browser already ran over the specific code.
Now as you might be aware, you also have the chance of turning of Javascript in your browser.
How can you handle this case that a user visits your page which has Javascript turned off?
Well it of course depends on your page, if your page depends heavily on Javascript,
you might just want to show him a message telling him that he should turn off Javascript or leave
the page because you're not able to provide a
browsing experience. In other cases, it might not really matter but if you want to display such a message
or any message, you can use the noscript tags
with any message between them and this message here will only be displayed,
of course in the normal page here, not in any console, in the normal page
if a user visits the page with Javascript being turned off